---
layout: post
title: "Topology in $R^n$"
date: 2018-5-29
categories: "Calculus"
tags: []
description: "Topology in $R^n$ by Baorun Mu"
header-img: "img/green.jpg"
---

# Open / Closed

## Open ball: 
Let x $\in$ $R^n$ and r > 0 a real number.

Define the open ball of radius r at the point x as
<center>
Br(x) := {y $\in$ $R^n$ : ||x - y|| < r}.
</center>

## Bounded:
A set S $\subseteq$ $R^n$ is bounded if there exists an r > 0 such that S $\subseteq$ $B_{r}$(0).

- Notice: An open ball is bounded.

## Interior Point:
Let S $\subseteq$ $R^n$ be an arbitrary set.

x $\in$ $R^n$ is an interior point of S if **there exists** an r > 0 such that $B_{r}$(x) $\subseteq$ S. 

## Boundary Point:
Let S $\subseteq$ $R^n$ be an arbitrary set.

x $\in$ $R^n$ is a boundary point of S if **for every** r > 0, $B_{r}$(x) $\cap$ S $\neq$ $\emptyset$ and $B_{r}$(x) $\cap$ $S^{c}$ $
\neq$ $\emptyset$.

- Notice: $\partial$ Q = R.

## Open Set:
A set S $\subseteq$ $R^n$ is open if every point of S is an interior point. i.e. S is open if for every x $\in$ S there exists an r > 0 such that $B_{r}$(x) $\subseteq$ S.

## Closed Set:
A set S is closed if $S^c$ is open.

### Countable Set:
A set S is countable if there exists an injective function f from S to the natural numbers N ={0, 1, 2, 3,...}.

If such an f can be found that is also surjective(thus has a one-to-one correspondence with the natural number set N), then S is called countably infinite.

 A countable set is either a finite set or a countably infinite set.

## Example:
- $R^n$ and $\emptyset$ are both closed and open. ($\emptyset$ is the complement of $R^n$ with respect to $\R^n$)

- The rationals Q $\subseteq$ R are not closed(and not bounded) 

## Proposition:
A set S $\subseteq$ $R^n$ is closed $\Longleftrightarrow$ $\partial$ S $\subseteq$ S.

## Proposition:
- Union/Intersection of finite open(closed) sets is ope(closed).

- Union of infinite open set is open, intersection of infinite open set may not be open. e.g. $\cap_{n=1}^{\infty}$(-$\frac{1}{n}$, $\frac{1}{n}$) = {0}.

- Intersection of infinite closed set is closed, union of infinite closed set may not be closed. e.g. $\cup_{n=1}^{\infty}$[-1+$\frac{1}{n}$, 1-$\frac{1}{n}$].

### Prove a set S is open:
- By definition
- Show that $S^c$ is closed
- By Continuity
- Show that S is the union/intersection of finite open sets

## Closure：
If S $\subseteq$ $R^n$ then the closure of S is the set $\bar{S}$ = S $\cup$ $\partial$ S.

## Propositoin:
- $\bar{S}$ is always a closed set.
- S is closed $\Longleftrightarrow$ S = $\bar{S}$
- $\bar{S}$ is the smallest closed set containing S.

# Sequence in R:
A map x: N $\rightarrow$ R. Notation: $(x_{n})_{n=0}^{\infty}$.

## Subsequence:
Given a sequence x: N $\rightarrow$ R and an increasing map n: N $\rightarrow$ N, a subsequence is the sequence formed by the compostion x(n(k)). Notation: $x_{n_{k}}$.

- Method: extracting elements from the original sequence while keeping them in the same order

- Notice: $x_{n_{k}}$ means that the kth element in the subsequence is the $n_{k}$ th element in the original element.

## Bounded Sequence:
Let $${(x_{n})}_{n=1}^{\infty}$$ be a sequence in R.
$(x_{n})$ is bounded if there exists an M > 0 such that |$x_{n}$| $\leq$ M for every n $\in$ N.

## Increasing(Decreasing) Sequence:
Let $$(x_{n})_{n=1}^{\infty}$$ be a sequence in R.
$(x_{n})$ is increasing if $x_{n+1}$ > $x_{n}$($x_{n+1}$ < $x_{n}$) for every n$\in$ N.

## Convergence:
If $$(x_{n})_{n=1}^{\infty}$$ is a sequence in R, $(x_{n})$ converges with limit L, $(x_{n}) \overset{n\rightarrow\infty}{\longrightarrow}$, if **for every** $\epsilon$ > 0 there exists an N $\in$ N such that whenever n > N, |$x_{n}$ - L| < $\epsilon$.

## Proposition:
If $$(x_{n})_{n=1}^{\infty}$$ is a sequence in R such that ($x_{n}$) $\rightarrow$ x and ($x_{n}$) $\rightarrow$ y then x = y. i.e. Limits of convergent sequences are unique.

- **Proof Method**: Triangle Inequality + $\frac{\epsilon}{2}$ + max{N1, N2}

## Limit Laws for Sequences

Let($a_{n}$) $\rightarrow$ L and ($b_{n}$) $\rightarrow$ M be convergent sequences.
- The sequence ($a_{n}$ + $b_{n}$) is convergent and ($a_{n}$ + $b_{n}$) $\rightarrow$ L + M
- The sequence ($a_{n}$ $b_{n}$) is convergent and ($a_{n}$ $b_{n}$) $\rightarrow$ LM.
- For any $\alpha$ $\in$ R the sequence $(\alpha a_{n})$ converges and ($\alpha$ $a_{n}$) $\rightarrow$ $\alpha$ L
- If M $\neq$ 0 then the sequence($\frac{a_{n}}{b_{n}}$ converges and ($\frac{a_{n}}{b_{n}}$) $\rightarrow$ L/M

- **Common Proof Method for $\epsilon - \delta$**: Triangle Inequality + $\frac{\epsilon}{2}$ + max{N1, N2}

## Squeeze Theorem for Sequences (in R)
Let ($a_{n}$), ($b_{n}$) and ($c_{n}$) be sequences in R, and assume that for sufficiently large k we have $a_{n} \leq b_{n} \leq c_{n}$. If ($a_{n}$) $\rightarrow$ L and ($c_{n}$) $\rightarrow$ L, then ($b_{n}$) is also convergent with limit L.

## Monotone Convergence Theorem:

If ($a_{n}$) is bounded from above an non-decreasing, then ($a_{n}$) is convergent with its limit given by sup{$a_{n}$: n $\in$ N}.

### The Completeness Axiom:
Let S be a nonempty set of real numbers. If S has an upper bound then S has a least upper bound, called the supremum of S and denoted by sup S. If S has a lower bound, then S has a greatest lower bound, called the infimum of S and denoted by inf S.

If S has no upper bound, define sup S to be +$\infty$, and if S has no lower bound, define inf S to be -$\infty$.

**Supremeum**:
If S has an upper bound the number a = supS is the unique number such that:
- x $\leq$ a for every x $\in$ S and 
- for every $\epsilon$ > 0 there exists x $\in$ S with x > a - $\epsilon$.

## Nested Interval Theorem
For each k $\in$ N, let $I_{k}$ = [$a_{k}$, $b_{k}$] be a closed interval such that
<center>
$I_{1}$ $\supseteq$ $I_{2}$ $\supseteq$ $I_{3}$ $\supseteq$ $I_{4}$ $\supseteq$ ... $\supseteq$ $I_{k}$ $\supseteq$ ...
</center>
is a nested collection of intervals, and ($b_{k}$ - $a_{k}$) $\overset{k\rightarrow\infty}{\longrightarrow}$ 0. (i.e. the length of the intervals is getting smaller.) Then the intersection of these intersection of these intervals in non-empty, and in particular consists of a single element, say p.

<center>
$\bigcap_{k=1}^{\infty} I_{k}$ = {p}.
</center>

- **Proof Method**: Consider the sequences $(a_{k})_{k=1}^{\infty}$ and $(b_{k})_{k=1}^{\infty}$ defined by endpoints of the intervals + Monotone Convergence Theorem

## Theorem:(Application of Nested Interval Theorem)
Evey bounded sequence in R has a convergent subsequence.

- **Proof Method**: Assume that $I_{n-1}$ has been given, and split it to two halves to construct $I_{n}$ + Nested Interval Theorem

## Proposition:
If $$(x_{n})_{n=1}^{\infty}$$ $\rightarrow$ x is a convergent sequence, then every subsequence ($x_{n_{k}}$) is also convergent with the same limit.(i.e. the same N works for $x_{n_{k}}$).

# Sequence in $R^n$

## Bounded Sequence:
A sequence $$(x_{n})_{n=1}^{\infty}$$ in $R^m$ is bounded if there exists M > 0 such that ||$x_{n}$|| $\leq$ M for every n $\in$ N.

## Theorem:
Every bounded sequence in $R^n$ has a convergent subequence.

- **Proof Method**: Notice that we cannot stitch a convergent subsequence of each component of ($x_{n}$) back together. Let ($x_{n_{k}}$) be a convergent subsequence of ($x_{n}$), with limit say x. Using the same indices, consider the subsequence ($y_{n_{k}}$). This sequence does not necessarily converge, but it is bounded, so ther is a convergent subsequence ($y_{n_{k_{l}}}$) $\rightarrow$ y. Since subseqeunce of a convergent sequence converges to the same limit, ($x_{n_{k_{l}}}$) $\rightarrow$ x. Consider the (sub)subsequence($x_{n_{k}}$, $y_{n_{k_{l}}}$), since each component converges, ($x_{n_{k_{l}}}$, $y_{n_{k_{l}}}$) converges.

## Convergence:
Let $$(x_{n})_{n=1}^{\infty}$$ be a sequence in $R^{n}$. Say ($x_{n}$) converges with limit x $\in$ $R^{n}$, denoted ($x_{n}$) $\rightarrow$ x, if for every $\epsilon$ > 0 there exists an N $\in$ N such that whenever n > N then ||$x_{n}$ - x|| < $\epsilon$.

## Proposition:
Let $$(x_{n})_{n=1}^{\infty}$$ be a sequence in $R^{m}$ and write $x_{n}$ = ($x_{n}^{1}$,..., $x_{n}^{m}$). ($x_{n}$) converges $\Longleftrightarrow$ ($x_{n}^{i}$) converges for i = 1,..., m.

## Proposition:
If S $\subseteq$ $R^{n}$, then x $\in$ $\bar{S}$ $\Longleftrightarrow$ **there exists** a convergent sequence ($x_{n}$) in S such that (x_{n}) $\rightarrow$ x.

- Note: If S $\subseteq$ $R^n$, define ($x_{n}$) a sequence in S if $x_{n}$ $\in$ S for every n $\in$ N. 

- **Common proof method**: construct a sequence converges to x by construction $x_{n}$ $\in$ $B_{\frac{1}{n}}$(x) and choose N s.t. $\frac{1}{n}$ < $\epsilon$.


## Corollary:
A set S $\subseteq$ $R^n$ is closed $\Longleftrightarrow$ **whenever** $$(x_{n})_{n=1}^{\infty}$$ is a convergent sequence in S

The closure of S is the collection of all limit points of convergent sequences in S.

## Cauchy Sequence:
A sequence $$(x_{n})_{n=1}^{\infty}$$ is said to be ***Cauchy*** if ***for every*** $\epsilon$ > 0 ***there exists*** a N $\in$ N such that if n, k > N then ||$x_{n}$ - $x_{k}$|| < $\epsilon$. (i.e. any $x_{n}$, $x_{k}$ after $x_{N}$ can be arbitrarily close).

## Proposition:
If $$(x_{n})_{n=1}^{\infty}$$ is a sequence in $R^n$, then ($x_{n}$) is ***Cauchy*** $\Longrightarrow$ ($x_{n}$) is convergent.

- **Proof Method**: ($\Leftarrow$) use the limit point to connect $x_{n}$ and $x_{k}$ ($\frac{\epsilon}{2}$ + $\frac{\epsilon}{2}$ = $\epsilon$)  ($\Rightarrow$) Assume ($x_{n}$) is Cauchy, show it is bounded by set $\epsilon$ = 1 and find M = max{$||$$x_{1}$$||$, ..., $||$$x_{N}$||$, 1+$||$$x_{N}$$||$}. Then there is a subsequence ($x_{n_{k}}$) $\overset{n\rightarrow\infty}{\Longrightarrow}$ x. Show the original sequence $x_{n}$ also converges to x by the frequently used technique: $\frac{\epsilon}{2}$ + $\frac{\epsilon}{2}$ = $\epsilon$.

## Complete:
A set S $\subseteq$ $R^{n}$ is complete if every Cauchy Sequence converges.

## Propositon:
A set S $\subseteq$ $R^n$ is complete if every Cauchy sequence converges.

- Notice: this implies $R^n$ is complete

## Corollary:
A set S $\subseteq R^{n}$ is complete $\Longrightarrow$ S is closed.

Proof:
($\Rightarrow$) Let $x_{n}$ be a Cauchy Sequence in E.
Then $x_{n}$ is a Cauchy Sequence in $R^n$. Then $x_{n}$ is a convergent sequence in $R^{n}$ (i.e. $\exists$ x $\in$ $R^n$ s.t. $x_{n} \overset{n\rightarrow\infty}{\longrightarrow} x$). Since E is closed, (E contains all its limit points), x $\in$ E. Thus, every Cauchy Sequence in E converges. Therefore, E is complete.

($\Leftarrow$) Let x be a limit point of E. (i.e. $\exists$ $x_{n}$ $\in$ E s.t. $x_{n}$ $\overset{n\rightarrow\infty}{\longrightarrow}$ x, x $\in$ $R^n$). Then $x_{n}$ is a convergent sequence in $R^n$. Then $x_{n}$ is a Cauchy Sequence. Since E is complete, $x_{n}$ converges and $x_{n}$ $\overset{n\rightarrow\infty}{\longrightarrow}$ y $\in$ E. Since limits are unique, y = x $\in$ E. Therefore, E is closed.

# Limit in $R^m$
Let f: $R^n \rightarrow R^m$ with c $\in$ $R^n$ and L $\in$ $R^m$. Say, $\displaystyle{\lim_{x \to{c}} f(x)}$ = L if for every $\epsilon$ > 0 there exists a $\delta$ > 0 such that whenever 0 <||x - c|| < $\delta$ then ||f(x) - L|| < $\epsilon$.

- Notice: the norm for$||$x - c$||$ is the $R^n$ norm, the norm for $||$f(x) - L$||$ is $R^m$ norm. Use norm instead of absolute value in $R^n$ where n $\geq$ 2.

## Multivariable Squeeze Theorem
Let f,g,h: $R^n$ $\rightarrow$ R be functions and c $\in$ $R^n$. Assume that in some neighbourhood of c, such that f(x) $\leq$ g(x) $\leq$ h(x) for all x in that neighbourhood. If $\displaystyle{\lim_{x \to{c}} f(x)}$ = $\displaystyle{\lim_{x \to{c}} h(x)}$ = L, then $\displaystyle{\lim_{x \to{c}} g(x)}$ = L.

# Continuity in R
Let f: R $\rightarrow$ R with c, L $\in$ R.
$\displaystyle{\lim_{x \to{c}} f(x)}$ = L if for every $\epsilon$ > 0 there exists $\delta$ > 0 such that whenever 0 < |x - c| < $\delta$ then |f(x) - L| < $\delta$.

f is continuous at c if $\displaystyle{\lim_{x \to{c}} f(x)} = f(c)$. 

If f is continuous at every point in its domain, we simply say that f is continous.

- Notice: $\displaystyle{\lim_{x \to{c}} f(x)}$ = f($\displaystyle{\lim_{x \to{c}} x}$) = f(c).

# Continuity in $R^m$
A function f: $R^n$ $\rightarrow$ $R^m$ is continuous at c $\in$ $R^n$ if $\displaystyle{\lim_{x \to{c}} f(x)}$ = f(c). 

If f is continuous at every point in its domain, say, f is continuous.

## Theorem:***(Convergent Sequence and Continuity)***
A function f:$R^n$ $\rightarrow$ $R^m$ is continuous $\Longleftrightarrow$ whenever $$(a_{n})_{n=1}^{\infty}$$ $\rightarrow$ a is a convergent sequence in $R^n$, then $$(f(a_{n}))_{n=1}^{\infty}$$ $\rightarrow$ f(a) is a convergent sequence in $R^m$.

- **Proof Method**: ($\Rightarrow$) Assume f is continuous, choose proper N and $\delta$ which satisfy continuity. ($\Leftarrow$) (Prove by contrapositive) Assume f is not continuous, say, at c. Show that for every $\epsilon$ > 0, no matter how close it is from $x_{n}$ to c, ||f($x_{n}$) - f(c)|| always no less than $\epsilon$. 

## Theorem:***(Open/Closed Set and Continuity)***
A function f: $R^n$ $\rightarrow$ $R^m$ is continuous $\Longleftrightarrow$ whenever U $\subseteq$ $R^m$ is an open(closed) set, then $f^{-1}$(U) $\subseteq$ $R^n$ is also an open(closed) set.

- Notice: useful technique to prove a set S is open(by constructing a function and S is a preimage of an open set in codomain)

- **Proof Method**: ($\Rightarrow$) U is open than $\forall$ $\epsilon$ > 0, $B_{\epsilon}(f(x))$ $\subseteq$ U. Let $\delta$ > 0 be the choice of delta which corresponds to this epsilon. Show that $B_{\delta}(x)$ $\subseteq$ $f^{-1}$(U) by continuity. ($\Leftarrow$) Set U = $B_{\epsilon}$(f(x)). Since $f^{-1}$ is open, $\exists$ $\delta$ > 0 such that $B_{\delta}$(x) $\subseteq$ $f^{-1}$(U). Show that this choice of delta will satisfy the continuity requirement.

## Theorem:***(Composition of continuous functions)***
If f: $R^n$ $\rightarrow$ $R^m$ is continuous at c and g: $R^m$ $\rightarrow$ $R^k$ is continuous at f(c), then g$\cdot$f: $R^n$ $\rightarrow$ $R^k$ is continuous at c. 

# Compactness:

A set S $\subseteq$ $R^n$ is compact if it is both ***closed*** and ***bounded***.

## Examples:

- Any closed ball $\bar{B_{r}(x)}$ $\subseteq$ $R^n$ is compact. e.g. The interval [a, b] $\subseteq$ R is compact.

- As finite unions of closed and bounded sets are closed and bounded, the finite union of compacts sets is compact. (not true for infinite unions)

- The set consisting of a single point is compact. By the previous example, every finite set is also compact.

- $R^n$ is not compact.(closed but not bounded)

## Bolzano-Weierstrass Theorem (Convergent Sequence and Compactness)
If S $\subseteq$ $R^n$, then the following are equivaleng:
- S is compact,

- Every sequence in S has a convergent subsequence, i.e. if $$(x_{n})_{n=1}^{\infty}$$ $\subseteq$ S, then there exists a subsequence ($x_{k_{n}}$) and a point x $\in$ s such that ($x_{k_{n}}$) $\rightarrow$ x.

## Theorem (Compactness and Continuity)
Let f: $R^n$ $\rightarrow$ $R^m$ be a continuous function. If K $\subseteq$ $R^n$ is compact, then f(K) is also compact. (i.e. The continuous image of compact sets is compact).

## Extreme Value Theorem
If f: $R^n$ $\rightarrow$ ***R*** is a continuous function and K $\subseteq$ $R^n$ is a compact set then there exists $x_{min}$, $x_{max}$ $\in$ K such that for every x $\in$ K, f($x_{min}$) $\leq$ f(x) $\leq$ f($x_{max}$), (i.e. f achieves both its extreme values on K.)

# Connectedness

A set S $\subseteq$ $R^n$ is disconnected if there exist non-empty $S_{1}$, $S_{2}$ $\subseteq$ S such that:
- S = $S_{1}$ $\cup$ $S_{2}$
- $\bar{S_{1}}$ $\cap$ $S_{2}$ = $\emptyset$ and $S_{1}$ $\cap$ $\bar{S_{2}} = $\emptyset$

($S_{1}$, $S_{2}$) is a disconnection of S.

If S admits no disconnection, S is connected.
